Add docs for upcoming Helios integration (#42947)
home-assistant/home-assistant.github.io: source/_integrations/helios.markdown

---
title: Helios
description: Instructions on how to integrate Helios ventilation units into Home Assistant.
ha_category:
  - Fan
  - Sensor
  - Switch
ha_config_flow: true
ha_release: 2026.2
ha_iot_class: Local Polling
ha_domain: helios
ha_platforms:
  - binary_sensor
  - date
  - fan
  - number
  - sensor
  - switch
ha_codeowners:
  - '@helios-ventilatoren-com'
ha_integration_type: integration
---

> The **Helios** {% term integration %} lets you control any Helios ventilation unit that is supported by the [helios_websocket_api](https://github.com/helios-ventilatoren-com/helios_websocket_api) (follow the link for a list of supported units). Detailed Product information [here](https://www.heliosventilatoren.de/en/products/ventilation-with-heat-recovery/domestic-units-for-wall-ceiling-installation).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The **Helios** {% term integration %} lets you control any [Helios ventilation unit](https://www.heliosventilatoren.de/en/products/ventilation-with-heat-recovery/domestic-units-for-wall-ceiling-installation) that is supported by the [helios_websocket_api](https://github.com/helios-ventilatoren-com/helios_websocket_api) (follow the link for a list of supported units). 
```

{% include integrations/config_flow.md %}

## Supported functionality

### Fan

The fan platform of this integration allows you to control the entire unit. You can turn the unit on/off using the toggle switch, adjust the fan speed, and select a ventilation profile.

### Sensor

The sensor platform allows you to monitor various metrics such as fan speeds, air temperatures, humidity, remaining filter life, cell state, and more.

### Binary sensor

The binary sensor platform allows you to monitor the status of the post heater.

### Switch

The switch platform allows you to lock the heat recovery bypass.

### Number

The number platform gives you control over the supply air temperatures.

### Date

The date platform allows you to set the filter change date.

## Profile switching

> For convenient switching of ventilation profiles in the GUI, just click on the `Helios` fan {% term entity %} to get a drop-down menu to select from. Alternatively, the action `fan/set_preset_mode` can be used.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For convenient switching of ventilation profiles in the GUI, select the `Helios` fan {% term entity %} to get a drop-down menu to select from. Alternatively, the action `fan/set_preset_mode` can be used.
```
We prefer [select over click](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/style-guide/a-z-word-list-term-collections/c/click)

The four standard Vallox profiles are supported:

- `Home`
- `Away`
- `Boost`
- `Fireplace`

## Fan actions

### Action Set profile fan speed home `

> Set the fan speed of the `Home` profile. Action: `helios.set_profile_fan_speed_home`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Action: Set profile fan speed home `

The `helios.set_profile_fan_speed_home` action sets the fan speed of the `Home` profile.
```
tiny style tweak

- **Data attribute**: `set_profile_fan_speed_home`
    - **Description**: Fan speed in %. `Integer`, between 0 and 100.
    - **Optional**: No

> ### Action Set profile fan speed away 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Action: Set profile fan speed away 
```

> Set the fan speed of the `Away` profile. Action: `helios.set_profile_fan_speed_away`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `helios.set_profile_fan_speed_away` sets the fan speed of the `Away` profile.
```

- **Data attribute**: `set_profile_fan_speed_away`
    - **Description**: Fan speed in %. `Integer`, between 0 and 100.
    - **Optional**: No

> ### Action Set profile fan speed boost 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Action: Set profile fan speed boost 
```

> Set the fan speed of the `Boost` profile. Action: `helios.set_profile_fan_speed_boost`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `helios.set_profile_fan_speed_boost` action sets the fan speed of the `Boost` profile.
```

- **Data attribute**: `set_profile_fan_speed_boost`
    - **Description**: Fan speed in %. `Integer`, between 0 and 100.
    - **Optional**: No

> ### Action Set profile

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Action: Set profile
```

> Set the profile, and optionally a duration for the profile to be active. Action: `helios.set_profile`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `helios.set_profile` sets the profile and, optionally, the duration for which the profile is active. 
```

- **Data attribute**: `profile`
    - **Description**: Profile to set, one of `home`, `away`, `boost`, `fireplace`, or `extra`.
      - **Optional**: No
- **Data attribute**: `duration`

>     - **Description**: Duration to activate the profile for; in minutes. `Integer` between 1 and 65535. Only applies to  `boost`, `fireplace` or `extra` profiles. 65535 sets the profile without a timeout.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - **Description**: Duration to activate the profile for; in minutes. `Integer` between 1 and 65535. Only applies to  `boost`, `fireplace`, or `extra` profiles. 65535 sets the profile without a timeout.
```

---
title: Helios
description: Instructions on how to integrate Helios ventilation units into Home Assistant.
ha_category:
  - Fan
  - Sensor
  - Switch
ha_config_flow: true

> ha_release: 0.96

Reviewer: ```suggestion
ha_release: 2026.2
```

ha_iot_class: Local Polling
ha_domain: helios
ha_platforms:
  - binary_sensor
  - date
  - fan
  - number
  - sensor
  - switch
ha_codeowners:
  - '@helios-ventilatoren-com'
ha_integration_type: integration
---

> The **Helios** {% term integration %} lets you control any Helios ventilation unit that is supported by the [helios_websocket_api](https://github.com/helios-ventilatoren-com/helios_websocket_api) (follow the link for a list of supported units).

Reviewer: please add a link to the Helios product page.

Author: Do you mean a link to the product page in this https://github.com/helios-ventilatoren-com/helios_websocket_api repository?

Reviewer: no, I meant the official product page. Something like https://www.heliosventilatoren.de, if that is the right place.

Reviewer: so that people who land on this page but don't know the product yet can learn about it.

Author: Link added

{% include integrations/config_flow.md %}

> ## Platforms

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Supported functionality
```

### Fan

The fan platform of this integration allows you to control the entire unit. You can turn the unit on/off using the toggle switch, adjust the fan speed, and select a ventilation profile.

### Sensor

The sensor platform allows you to monitor various metrics such as fan speeds, air temperatures, humidity, remaining filter life, cell state, and more.

### Binary sensor

The binary sensor platform allows you to monitor the status of the post heater.

### Switch

The switch platform allows you to lock the heat recovery bypass.

### Number

The number platform gives you control over the supply air temperatures.

### Date

The date platform allows you to set the filter change date.

## Profile switching

For convenient switching of ventilation profiles in the GUI, just click on the `Helios` fan {% term entity %} to get a drop-down menu to select from. Alternatively, the action `fan/set_preset_mode` can be used.

The four standard Vallox profiles are supported:

- `Home`
- `Away`
- `Boost`
- `Fireplace`

## Fan actions

> ### Action `helios.set_profile_fan_speed_home`

Reviewer: Please use the non-YAML form in the title and the YAML action name in the introduction. You can see an example here:
https://github.com/home-assistant/home-assistant.io/blob/current/source/_integrations/_integration_docs_template.markdown?plain=1#L139

Author: Changed in latest commit

Set the fan speed of the `Home` profile.

> | Data attribute | Optional | Description                                     |

Reviewer: We [prefer lists over tables](https://developers.home-assistant.io/docs/documenting/general-style-guide#tables).
You could use the format used in this example (https://github.com/home-assistant/home-assistant.io/blob/current/source/_integrations/_integration_docs_template.markdown?plain=1#L143)

Author: Changed in latest commit

| `fan_speed`            |       no | Fan speed in %. `Integer`, between 0 and 100.   |

### Action `helios.set_profile_fan_speed_boost`

Set the fan speed of the `Boost` profile.

| Data attribute | Optional | Description                                     |
|------------------------|----------|-------------------------------------------------|
| `fan_speed`            |       no | Fan speed in %. `Integer`, between 0 and 100.   |

### Action `helios.set_profile`

Set the profile, and optionally a duration for the profile to be active.

| Data attribute | Optional | Description                                                                                                                                                                           |
|----------------|---------:|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| `profile`      |       no | Profile to set, one of `home`, `away`, `boost`, `fireplace`, or `extra`.                                                                                                              |

> | `duration`     |      yes | Duration to activate the profile for; in minutes. `Integer` between 1 and 65535. Only applies to  `boost`, `fireplace` or `extra` profiles. 65535 sets the profile without a timeout. |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `duration`     |      yes | Duration to activate the profile for; in minutes. `Integer` between 1 and 65535. Only applies to  `boost`, `fireplace` or `extra` profiles. 65535 sets the profile without a timeout. |

## Removing the integration

This integration follows standard integration removal.

{% include integrations/remove_device_service.md %}
```
